•••
ROBERT THURMAN
ROBERT THUR.MAN, ONE of the first Ame1icans to be ordained as a Tibetan
Buddhist mon??, is often considered to be the most prominent and influential
expert on Buddhism in the United States today. A scholar, translator, activist,
and lecturer (as well as father of the actress Uma Thuanan), Thurman began
his explorations into Buddhism in his early twenties when he traveled to India
on a "vision quest" and ended up becoming a student of the Dalai Lama. Upon
retunliJ1g to the United States, Thurman wanted to continue his studies and
become an academic because, in his own words, ''lt]he only lay institution in
A.Jnerica comparable co monasticism is the universiry." Thurman is cun-ently
the Jey Tsong Khapa Professor of Tndo-Tibetan Buddhist Studies at Columbia
University and the president of Tibet House, a nonprofit organization dedicated
to the study and preservation of Tibetan culture.
liif, 11ilc L[fe (2004), from which "Wisdom" is taken, is one in an impressive
series of books that Thunnan has w1itten on Buddhism for a Western audience.
Chief among his goals u1 this text is co guide laypeople into their 6rsc explorations
of the Buddhist concept of selflessness. The ultimate goal of the lessons that
Thurman offe rs his readers is to impart a tkeper sense of interconnectedness . a
process thar is meant to reduce rhe negative feelings individuals hold about
themselves and to increase tht: positive feelings they have for themselves and
others. In doing so, Thunnan st:eks to show that the happiness America's founders
guaranteed "should be O\.trS and that there are methods for discovering
which happiness is really reliable and satisfying, and then securing that in an
end uriJ1g way without depriving others .. ,
Thu1111an's more recent books are concerned with the relevance of
Buddhism to contemporary world problems He has argued, for example. that
pre-invasion Tibet had advanced quite for beyond the militarism char still
deforms social lite iJ1 the modern world. "The fact that a majoiity of [the! country's
single males fwerej monks rather than soldiers'' is a major lesson for us
today. ln vllhy 1/ie Dnlai L1111n Matters (2008), Thurman makes the case that tht:
Dalai Lama plays a unique rok in global culture precisely because he advocates a
new ethics of altruism that can bridge cultural divides.
'"\Vhdo111.'· fro111 INFINITE LIJ'E by Rohen Thum1Jt1. t·opyri??hr i"l 10114 by Robert ThumlJn Used hy p<·nt11ss1011 of
R.ivcrhead Book,. ,n impnm of l'e11gu111 Grmop (USA) LLC.
Finni <-1um,uio11 i?? drawn frmn Jo$hu.1 C:lcnn, "The Niny (;ntl) nrNirvJna.·· H1'ft,/m1w. JuJy 23, 2tl0<) <http://h1lohrow.
com/ 2t >119/• >7 /23/th??-nlltv-gnLty-of-mrv;m,ll>.
440
•••
Wisdom
Preamble: Selflessness
WISDOM 441
At one point in the early 1970s, after ['d gotten my Ph.D. and started teaching
l3uddhism, I went back to visit my old reacher, the Mongolian lama Geshe
Wangyal. We were working on a project to translate a Buddhist scientific
text from the Tibetan. We were six ot seven people gathered around a
kitchen table. and Geshe-la began to calk about the inner science of Buddhist
psychology, the Abhidharma. He was reading us a few verses about the insight
of sdflessness. the deep release of becoming unbound, when l began to feel a
little dizzy, even nauseous. It was a funny feeling. It felt lightly like a vibration
spinning in my head. The vibration came not from Geshe-la, but from
chis ancient tradition. Ir was as though my habitual mind couldn't quite frud
traction. l realized that if I fought ic, the sensation would only get more
nerve-wracking and 1 would only feel more nauseous. So 1 didn't fight it.
Instead, I let go and relaxed, and soon l was able to orient myself in another
way, away from my "self." I felt like I was slowly but surely loosening my
self-centered perspective on life and che world. ln a useful way, a strengthening
\.Vay, I was beginning to expe1;ence the gn::at Buddhist mystery that is the
selflessness of subjects and objects.
The Buddha based his psychology on his discovery of actual and ultimate
reality. This he caJled "selflessness" and "voidness," or "emptiness." Some
people lovt' these words from the moment they hear them. but others are
frightened by rhem. People often ask me, "Why did Buddha have to be
such a downer? Obviously nirvana is a happy, chcerfii. l state. So why didn't
he just call it 'bliss' or something? Why did he have to label the reality he
discovered with negative words such :is ·voidness,' 'emptiness,' and 'selflessness'?"
When people respond negatively to these t??rms, it's often because
they' re worried that the words imply they are going to die, disappear, or go
cr:.izy in their attempts to seek enlightenment. And that's exactly why the
Buddha called reality by those names. He did it on purpose. to liberate you!
Why? Because the only thing th:it's frightened by the word "seHlessness" is
the artificially constructed, unreal, and unrealistic self That self is only a pretend
selt?? it lacks reality, it doesn't really exist. Thar pset1do-self seems to
guiver and quake because the- habit that makes it seem real wants to keep its
hold on you. So if you 're seeking happiness and freedom, then you should
want co scare the heck out of your "self"-you want to scare it right out of
your head!
Actually. it is constantly scaiing the heck out of i1011. Y 011r "self' is always
busy terrorizing you. You have :i terro1ist in your own brain, coming out of
your own instincts and culture, who is peste1iJ1g you all the cin1e. "Don't relax
442 ROBERT THURMAN
too much," it is saying, "you'll get stepped on. A bug will bite you. Someone
will be nasty to you. You'll get passed by, abused, sick. Don't be honest.
Pretend. Because if you're honest, they'll hurt you.'' And it's ordering you.
"Be my slave. Do what I tell you to do. Keep me installed up here at this v.::1y
superficial level of the brain where I sit in my weird Woody A.1Je11-cype cockpit.
Uec:wse I'm in control." Your falsely perceived, fixated, domineeting self is
precisely i.vhar·s getting ben;veen you and a fulfilling life.
Early on, some of the Western psychologists who were beginning to learn
from the Buddhist tradition-members of the tran??persoual and other
movements-came up with the idea that the relationship between Buddhist
and Western psychology is th.is: "Western psychology helps somebody who
feds they are nobody become somebody, and Buddhist psychology helps somebody
who feels they are somebody become nobody." When I first heard this,
l was at an Inner Science conference with the Dalai Lama. Everybody laughed,
applauded, and thought it was a great insight. The Dalai Lama just looked at me
and kind of winked and was coo police co say anytlu11g. I scarted to jump up to
make a comment, but he stopped me. He told me to be quiet and let :i!J of them
ponder it for a few years until they realized the flaw in their thinking. Because of
course that idea is not even remotely correct.
The purpose of rea]jzing your own selflessness is not to feel like you are
nobody. After he became enlightened. the Buddh;i did not sit under a tree
drooling and sayiJ1g, "Oh, wow! 1'111 nobody!" Th.ink about it: If he just
"became nobody," if he escaped from the world through self-obliteration, then
he wouldn't have been able to share so many teadtings here on earth, co work
for the good of all beings for years and years, long after he achieved nirvana. He
would've just stayed in his "nobody" state and forgotten about alJ of us poor
humans busy suffering through our nriserable lives.
The reason why we sometimes think that the goal of Buddhism is just "to
become nobody" is chat we don't understand the concept of selflessness. "Selflessness"
does not mean that we are nobody. It does not mean chat we cease
to exi t. Not at all. There is no way you can ever "not exist." just as you
cannot become "nothing." Even if you go through deep meditation into
what is caUed "the realm of absoJute nothingness," you will stiJl exist. Even
if you are so freaked out by a tragedy, such as losing your only child, that
you try to end your existence completely, you will still exist. I have a healthy
respect for tragedy. We do have terrible tragedies. Personally, l don't bear
nusfortune well; it knocks me out. But there is no way to become nobody.
Even if you were to succeed in killing yourself, you will be shocked when
you awaken to disembodied awareness. om-of-body but still a somt:body, a
ghostly wraith who wishes he hadn't just done that. And a terribly unfortunate
Uving person who has be-en so brutalizt:d that he blanks out who he was in a
seemingly impenetrable psychosis is still somebody, as everybody else around
him knows.
Our mind is so powe,ful that it can create a state of absolute nothingness
that seem?? totally concrete. Thousands of yogis in the history of Lndia and a
WISDOM 443
few mystics in the West have entered such a state of nothingness. But no one can
stay there forever, and it is not where you wane to be.
Have you ever had a minor experience of nothingness? I've had it in the
dentist's chair with sodium pentothal. because I used to eat a lot of sweets :md
not brnsh my teeth as a youngster so l had to have teecl1 pulled. They give you
this knockout anesthetic, and if you are a hardworking intelJectual, you are tired
of your mind, so you think, "Oh great, I'm going to be obliterated for a little
while." You 're really pleased, and you feel this little buzz, and you 're just about
co get there. You 're going to e.xpe1??ence nothingness. a little foretaste of the
nihilistic notion of nirvana! Blit suddenly the nurse is shaking you awake saying,
"You've been slobbering in chat chair long enough. Get out of here." It's over.
You started to pass out, wanting to be gone, but now you're suddenly back with
no sense of having been gone at all! And that's what it is like in the state of
absolute nothingness. Lt's like being passed our in the dentist's chair. There's no
sense of duration of time. But eventually you wake up, totally clisoriented with a
nasty headache, and you never even got to enjoy the oblivion.
So we can never become nothing, as appealing as rhac may sound to those
who are addicted to the idea of nothiJ1gness after death. We are always
somebody. even though we are selfless in reality. We are just different sortS of
·'somebodies" than we used to be. "Realizing your selflessness" does nor mean
that you become a nobody, it means that you become the type of somebody
who is a viable, useful somebody, not a 1igid, fixated, I'm-the-centerof-
rhe-universe, isolated-from-others somebody. You become the type of somebody
who is over rhe idea of a conceptually fixated and self-created ''self," a
pseudo-self that would actually be absolutely weak, because of being unrelated
co the reality of your consrantly changing nature. You become the type of somebody
who is content never to be quite that sure of who you are-always free to
be someone new, somebody more.
That's the whole point of sel.flessness. 1f you don't know exactly who you
are alJ the time, you're not sick, you're actually in luck, because you're more
realistic, more free, and more awake! You're being too intelligent to be stuck
inside one frozen mask of personality! You've opened up your wisdom, and
you've realized chat "knowing who you are" is the trap-an impossible selfobjectificarion.
None of us knows who we really are. Faciflg that and then
becoming aU that we can be-astonishing, surprising, amazing-aJw;iys fresh
and new, always free to be more, brave enough to beco1ne a work in progress,
choosing happiness, open-mindedJJess, and love over certitude, rigiclity, and
fear-this is realizing selflessness!
I never met the late, great comedian Peter SeUers, except splitting my sides
in laughter while watching some of his movies, especially the Pink Pt111ther series.
I know he had his ups and downs in his personal life, though you can't believe
alJ the things you hear from the tabloids. Bur l did read a quote from_ him, or
maybe from his psychiat1ist, that he was deeply troubled and distressed because
he suffered from ··not knowing who he really was." He would get into his roles
as an actor so totally, he would think he was the person he was playing, and he
couldn't find himself easily as his "own'' person. So he suffered, feeling himself
444 ROBERT THURMAN
"out of control" in his life. When I read this, my heart went out to him. 1 imagined
his psychianist seemly telling him he had better calm down and track himself
down, and put a lid on his ebullient sense of life, leading him on and on in
self-absorption in therapy under the guist: that he was going co "fu1d himself'
once and for all I, feeling a bit more freed by having awakened ro even the
tiniest caste of selflessness, wanted to cry out to Peter Sellers, "Stop suffering by
thinking your insight is confusion! Don't listen to the misknowing and even fear
your freedom! Learn to surf the energy of life that surges through your openness!
You have discovered your real self already. your great self of selflessness, and that
opennes,- is vvhat enables you ro manifest the heart that shines through your
work and opens the hearts of your audiences. Your gift is to release them inco
laughter, itself a taste of freedom! Why be confused and feel your great gift is
something wrong?" But l didn't know rum so l could nor cell him what I'm
telJing you. But our lives are infinite and l will be telling his ongoing life-fonn
one of these days, whether I recognize him or not!
The Buddha was happy about not knowing who he was in the usual rigid,
fixed sense. He caUed the failure to know who he was "enlightenment." Why?
Becatise he realized that selflessness kindles the sacred fire of compassion. When
you become aware of your selOessness, you realize that any way you feel yourself
to be at any time is just a relational, changi11g consr:ruccion. When that
happens, you have a huge inner release of compassion. Your inner creativity
about your living self is energized, and your infinite Jjfe becomes your ongoing
work of art.
You see others caught in the ,uffe1ing of the tenninal self-habit and you feel
real compassion. You feel so much better, so highly relieved, char your only concern
is helping those constricted other people You are free to worry about thtm
because, of course, they are having a hon·ible time uying to know who they are
and trying co be who they think they should be! They are busy being ripped
apart by the great streams of ignorance, illness, death, and other people's irritating
habits. So they sutler. And you, in your boundless, infu1itely interconnected,
compassionate state, can help chem.
This is the other crucial point about selflessness: it does not mean that you
are disconnected. Even nirvana is not a state of disconnection from tht world.
There is no way to become removed from yourself or from other beings. We
are ultimately boundless-that is to say, our relative boundaries are pem1eable.
Bue we are still totally interconnected no matter what we do. You cannot disappear
into your own blissful void, because you are part of everyone and they
are pare of you. If you have no ultimatt seH?? that makes you free to be your
relative self, along with other beings. It's as if yom band n,·presencs the universe
and your fingers represent all beings. Each of your fu1gers can wiggle on its
own, each can operate independently. just as each being has its own identity.
And yet your fingers are part of your hand. If your hand did not exist. your
fingers would nor exist. You are one of many, many fingers on the hand that
is aJJ life.
To my surprise and delight, I learned recently thar even some ·westt:m
psychologisD; are now beginning ro study and understand the ham, done by
WISDOM 445
self-centered thinking. The psychologist Dr. Lirry Sche1wit2 conducted a study
about rype A people--rhe aggressive, loud. annoying types, like me. Scientists
used to ch.ink cbat type As died younger because of their fast-paced, stressful
lives. 13uc this new study reveals that, in fact, some of us type A people are not
going to die of a heart attack that soon after all. The type Bs out there, the mildmannered,
quiet, inward-focused types, migbc find chis wotTisome! We may stay
around for years bothering chem, because it rums out that the type A personality
is not a risk factor for coronary heart disease or other stress-related health problems.
Jt tums out that some people, like me, though we freak out all the time,
are not always chat scressed. Some of us actually ei-uoy being this way.
What is the real risk factor, then? Scherwitz and his colJeagues reanalyzed
the data and conducted some new studies. They dfacovered, by analyzing the
speech patterns of type As and type Bs, chat the high risk of heart disease and
stress-related illness is cotTelated with the a111011111 ??f se!frefere11ce in people's
speech-the amount of self-preoccupation, self-centeredness, and narcissism.
"Me, me, I. I, my, my, mine, mine. My golf course, my cot111oy club, my job,
my salary, my way, my family. my religion, my shri11e, my guru, my, my, mine."
The more "I, me, my. and mine" there is in their speech-"mjne" most of allthe
more likely they are to succumb to stress, to keel over because their bodies
revolc against that pressure of self-involvement. Whereas even though some people
can be aggressive, annoying, loud, and seemingly "stressed," if their overall
motivation is altruistic and they don't pay too much attention to themselves.
they live longer. And the quiet type Bs who are also more concerned about
others, not necessarily out of any altruistic religious inklings, but just naturally
nor paying much attention to themselves, tend to live longer, coo.
l find this study amazing. I was with the Dala.i Lama when he heard about
the results. He was inoigued ,ll1d very pleased. '·Oh, really?" he said. "Let me see
chat paper. fn Budd11isr psychology, we also bave this idea that obsessive selfpreoccupation-
possessiveness and selfishness and self-centeredness-is life's chief
demon!"
Let us explore the problems created by this demon of self-preoccupation,
the ways in which it causes us suffering. We wilJ then practice a fundamental
meditation in whjch we look for the fixated self and find that it does not, after
all. exist. Once we have freed ourselves from the constricting habit of always
thinking that we are the center of the universe, we wilJ experience our fu:st
rasce of the boundless joy and compassion that is infi11ite life.
PROBLEM: MISKNOWLEDGE AND
SELF-PREOCCUPATION
One of the hardest things we have to do on a reguJar basis is to adrnit that we are
wrong. We stubbornly insist that we're right in situations where we're not quite
sure if we are, and even when we sense that we've slipped. How n1uch more
indignant do we become when we feel certain that we're right and someone
has rhe gall or the stupidity to challenge us? lu chis case, we tee! an absolute
446 ROBERT THURMAN
imperative to jump up and trnmpet our rightness. If we still cannot get others to
agree ,,,ith us, we soon become self-righteous and then outraged.
Ildievc it or not, tbe fact that we ??truggle so much with being wrong is of
tremendous importance to our task of awakening to the reality of selflessness.
We should examine our habit of needing ro be right carefully co see why it
feels so good.
Being tight n1eans chat the world affirms us iJ1 what we think we know.
"Knowing" something is a way of controlling ic, being able co put ir in ics proper
place in relation to us so that we can use it effectively. A?? Dham1akirri, the
seventh-century Indian philosopher, sajd, "All successful action is preceded by
accurate knowledge." So knowledge is power, in the sense that it empowers us
to ace successfully. Misknowledge, misunderstanding a situation, is weakness, in
the sense that our actions may faiJ in their aim, backfire. or have unintended
consequences. Knowledge is secutiry, in chat we know our vulnerabilities and
can avoid ham,. Misknowledge is danger. in that we don't know what others
might do to us or what rraps may await us. We therefore feel powerful and
secure when we're righc, weak and vulnerable when we're wrong.
Viewed in this context, being right seems like a struggle for survival, a drive
to ,,vin. It's natural for us to cling to that feeling, even when we have not investigated
the reaJjty around us because we don't really want co know if we are
wrong. We thjnk that finding ourselves in the wrong means :1 loss of power
and safety, forgetting that actually ii is the 011/y w11y for us co discover what is
truly right and tmly wrong, thereby gaining re::tl power and real safety. When
we pretend, we focus our attention on appearing to be right no matter what
the reality, we distract ourselves from being awake to what really is going on,
and so place ourselves at a disempowering disadvantage.
In light of this simple analysis, what lies at the center of our constant need to
assure our 1ightuess and, therefore, our power and security? Is it not the cerr:1inty
that "I am"? Does not the strong sense of "I am'' seem absolutely right, unquestionable,
in fuct? Eve1y self-identification, judgment, and impulse beginning with
"I am''-"I an1 n1e," "I an1 An1crican," ··1 am hunrnn," "I am male," "I am
right," ''I am sure," "I am angry"-secms natural, undeniable, imperative. As
such, we are habitually d,iven to obey in feelings, thoughts, words, and deeds
whatever comes from within the inexhaustible fountain of l am 's, [ thin.k's,
r want's, I love's, T hate's, and I do's. "r· is rhe absolute captain of our ship,
the agent of our fate, the: master of our Jjves.
When apes or bulls or mountain goats snort and paw the ground and then
charge head first at om· another, we interpret their behavior as an ''I'' versus
"I" contest, sometimes to the death. Similarly, the imperative issuing from our
"I" can be: so adamant, so unchallengeable, that we human beings, too, will sacrifice
our lives. Just think of the nature of such statements as follows, when the
"I" is aligned with country, church, God, family, race, gender, or species: "J am
a patriot!" "l am a Protestm1t!'' ''I am a Catholic!" "I am ::i Christian!" "I am a
Muslim!" "I am a believer!" "I am an atheist1 " "I am white!'' ''f am :1 male!"
"I :un hmnan!" [n these situations, the 'T' exercises tremendous power over us.
and can oftc:n lead us to our death.
WISDOM 447
The "I." the ego-self seemingly absolutely resident in the heart of our being,
is the one thing of which we each :ire ::ibsolucely certain, which we wiJJ die for,
vvhich we will kill for, which we will obey slavishly and unquestioningly
throughout our lives. We are so accustomed to our habitu,1I sense of self that
we consider even the slightest absence of it-a moment of derangement, a loss
of consciousness in fainting or deep sleep, :i disorienting distraction of passion or
ten-or. a dizzying state of drunkenness or drug-intoxication, a psychological or
neurological disorder-absolutely terrifying. We can't imagine our lives without
our ''l'' as ::1 constant, demanding presence.
What is shocking and difficult for most Westerners to accept is that the
Buddha discovered chat this most certain knowledge of the "self' is actually
"misknowlcdge"-a fundamental misunderstandi11g, a delusion. And what's
more, he realized that this discovery was the key ro liberation, rhe gateway to
enlightenment. When he saw the false nature of the "T," he emitted his "lion's
roar." pronouncing the reality of selflessness, identirylessness. voidness. This was
his Eureka! moment, his scientific breakthrough, his insight into reafay, from
whence has flowed for thousands of years the whole philosophical, scientific,
and religious educational movement that is Buddhism. Identifying this habituaJ,
ce1tain self-knowledge as the core misknowledge aUowed the Buddha to give
birth co wisdom, truth, and liberating enlightenment.
But the Buddha knew perfectly well that it would do no good to simply
order people co accept his declaration of selilessness as dogma and cli!,g ro it as
a slogan or creed. The instinctual entanglement of human beings within the knot
of self-certainty is much too powe1ful to be dislodged in this way, selflessness at
first too coumerintuitive to be acknowledged as truth. No. the Buddh::i rea]ized,
people must discover their real nature for themselves. So he made his declaration
of selflessness not a statement offact but rather a challenge to inqui1y.
"T have discovered selflessness!" the Buddh:i a11nounced. "I have seen
through the reality of the seemingly solid self that lay at the core of my being.
This insight did not destroy me-it only destroyed my suffe1ing. It was my liberation!
But you need not believe me. Discover the truth for yourself Try with
all your might to verify this 'self you feel is in there, to pin it down. lf you can
do that, fine, cell me I'm wrong and ignore whatever else I may have to say. But
if you fail to find it, if each thing you come up with dissolves under further
analysis, if you discover, as I did, that then:: is no atomic, indivisible, durable
core 'self,' then do not be afraid. Do not recoil or tum away., R.ather, confront
that emptiness and recognize it as the doo1way to the supreme freedom! See
chrough the 'self and it will release you. You will discover that yeu :ire a part
of the infinite web of interconnt'ctedness with alJ ocher beings. You will live in
bliss from now on as the rdacive self you always wen::; free at long bst from the
stn1ggle of absolute alienation, free co help ochers find their own blessed freedom
and happiness!''
Though in this paraphrase of his core tt'aching the Buddha offers us much
encouragement, the challenge remains its central thrust. ''You think you 're really
you' Don't just accept that blindly! Verify whether or not your 'self is actuaHy
prest'nt within you. Tum your focused attention co it ::md explore it. If it's as
448 ROBERT THURMAN
solid as it seems, then it should be solidly encounrerable. If you can't encounter
it, then you must confront your error."
The great philosopher Descartes made a grave en-or when he thought he
discovered in his fixed subjective self the one certain thing about existence.
After dernolishix1g the entire universe of observable things with hammer blows
of systematic doubt, he was unable to give even a tiny tap to collapse this sense
of selfl And so he set down as the basis for his entire philosophy the famous
proposition, "I think, therefore l am!"
Believe it br not, in his deep exploration for the ''self," Descartes almost
took another path that would have Jed him to enlightenment. He got very
close to discovering that he could not find the ''self' he fdt to be so absolutely
present. After intensively dissecting appearances, drilling through layer
upon layer of seeming certainties, he came out with nothing that he could
hold onto as the "self." But then he made the tr:igic mistake. Instead of
accepting his selflessness, he instead said to himself, ''Ah! Well, of course I
cannot find the self. lt is the self that is doing the looking! The ']' is the
subject and so it cannot be an object. Though I cannot find it, still my
knowledge chat it is the absolute subject cannot be doubted. It confirms its
existence by doubting its existence. Cvgito ergo sum! Of this I c:111 remajn
absolutely certain."
Why was this m.istaken? His logic sounds plausible enough at first. It is, after
all, a clever way out of the dilemma of looking for something y0l1 are sure is
there but cannot find. But what's wrong with it? Let's say that I am looking
for a cup. I find it, so l can be certain that the cup exists. I look for my fiiend
and find her, so I can be ce1tain she's there. I look for my glasses, I do not find
them-so I proclaim certainty that they are there? No-I go get another pair
because I acknowledge l've lost them. I look for my oh-so-famil.iaT "l," :ind
1 cannot find it! Why would I think it's there, then? Because I've arbitrarily put
it in the category of "things that are there only when l can't fmd them"? No,
when I can't find it, it's rather more sensible chat I must give up the sense of
certainty that it's there. I feel it's there when I don't look for it, but as soon as
I look for it with real effort, it instantly eludes discovery. It seems always to be
just around the next comer in my mind, yet each time I tum around to seize it,
it disappears. And so I must slowly come to accept the fact that it may not be
tbere after ail.
Puc another way, imagine that you are walking through the desert when,
far off on the horizon, you see an oasis. Yer when you get closer, it disappears.
"Aha!" you think to yourself "A mirage.'' You waJk away. MiJes later. you
turn around and look back. There's the oasis again! Do you feel certain that
the water is there now? No, on the contrary you feel certai.n that it is only a
mirage of water. In the same way, when you look for the "self' and don't find
it, you must accept that it is merely a mirage. Your solid self-sense is only an
iJJusion.
Had Descartes persisted and fou.nd the door to freedom 111 his selflessness, as
the Buddha did, then instead of proclaiming, "l think, therefore I am,'' he might
have said. "Even though l can find no concrete, fixated 'self,' I stiJJ can think.
WISDOM 449
f stiU seem to be. Therefore I can concinue co be myself, selflessly, as a relative,
conventional, but ultimately unfindable being."
Whenever you decide to try a particular yoga lor fonn of medjtation], the
crucial first step is always deciding to make the change. You must begin by
accepting the fact that your habitual conceptions could be wrong. ff, for example,
you live with the delusion that it is just fine to remain addicted to nfrotine,
that three packs of cigarettes a day puts you in optimal operating condition, then
there is no way you will successfully complete a yoga co quit snt0king. Likewise,
in this crucial guest of the sel( the presumed core of your self-addiction, you
must first convince yourself through empi,ical observation that the way you
hold your self-identity-the consnicted foeling of being wrapped around a
solid, independent core-is uncomfortable and disabling.
Why should you even care if the 1igid "self' that you believe in so strongly
really exists or not? Our self feels most real when we are 1ight and tighteous,
when we are wrongly or unfairly challenged. And it also seems unique,
completely separate from everyone and everything else in the universe. Thjs separateness
can feel like freedom and independence when we are in a good mood.
But when we are in trouble, lonely or angry, under pressure or dissatisfied, chis
separateness feels Jjke isolation, alienation, unfajr treatment, or deprivation.
When we are wholly gripped by fury, the sea1ing energy that wanes to attack a
target picks our "I" up like a mjndless tool and flings us at the other person. It is
so disconnected that it even disreg-.irds our sense of self-protection, making us
take actions that injure us, ignore injuries undergone, and even harm others
with no regard for the consequences. There is no more powerful demonstration
of our strong sense of being an independent entity than when we give ourselves
over completely to anger.
When we look around at others, we sec that they are just as alienated from
us as we are alienated from them. As we want things from them, they want
things from us. As we reject chem, they seem to reject us. We don't love
them, so how can we expect them to love us? And yet they are endless,
while "!" am just one. So l am badly outnumbered. I feel threatened. I can
never gee enough, have enough, or be enough. I will inevitably lose the meversus-
aU-of-chem stnigglc in the long nm.
We can, of course, experience moments of unity with otber beings, through
falling in love, or having a child, for example. When we do, we experience tremendous
relief-for a moment, there are t\;vo of us teamed up against all the
others together. We have an ally. But unfortunately chose moments are too
rare, and they do not last long before the old self-isolation re-emerges. Even
lovers can rum into adversa1ies, couples often seek divorce, and children recoil
from their parents, who in tum reject chem.
This alienation caused by the presurned independent, absolute self was why
the Buddha saw its ilJusion as the source of human suffering. The situation of
feeling that it's always "the self versus the world," with the self as the longterm
loser, is unsatisfactory and w1tenable. When we recognize the inevitable
nonviability of our self-centered reality, it motivates us to engage in the quest
for the true n:iture of che self. It makes it existentially essential for us to pause
450 ROBERT THURMAN
in our headlong rush through life and tum within, to verify whether the "self'
really exists as we feel it does.
We can take great encouragement from the fuct that tht· Buddha told us
we could e. cape from our suffe,ing. StiJJ, we cannot merely accept someone
else's report. No one else can do the job of replacing mjsunderstanding with
understanding for us. We must look at reality and verify for ourselves whether
our habitual sense of having a fixed self or the Buddha's djscovcry of selflessness
is ultim<!!ely true. In th is way, we can begin to transform the selfpreoccupation
that causes chronic Sl1ffc1ing into thf' insightful, gradual opening
and letting go .of the self that is, paradoxically, so sdf-fulfilling. We w;rnt to be
happy, but ironically we can only become happier to the extent that we can
develop an unconcern for our "self." This process is long and graduaJ, though
you will experience frequenc breakthrough moments that will thrilJ you and
motivate you co continue.
Before we :ictually engage in the mt:ditation practice used to l-bscover the true
nature of the self, we must set up om parameters in practical. clear tem1s. When
we look through a darkened house for a misplaced key. we first remember what
the key looks like, and then we search for ir carefully, room by room, turning
lights 011 as we. go. We use a Oashlght to look under beds and in hidden comt:rs.
W11en we have looked eve1ywhere t:xhaustively and not found it, we decide
we've missed it somehow, so we go back and repeat the process. However, after
one or tv,ro se:irches of this kind, we come to a decisive conclusion that the key is
not in the house. We know we could continue looking endlessly, but that would
be impractical. So we decide to proceed accordingly with our lives.
In the case of the quest for the self, we will look through aU the processes of
our body and mind that we can find and investigate them thoroughJy. Our physical
systems. sensational feelings, conceptual image bank, emotional energies, and
consciousness itself constitute the house through which we will search. There are
also various vaguely defined areas such as "spirit" and "soul" that, Jike a dusty
attic or dank cellar. we may feel the need to explore. lt is easy to get lost in
these murky, dank, and oft-forgotten quarters of che mind. So we must get a
clear picture of what we want to find ahead of time. And most imponanr, we
must set some limits to the exercise. since practically speaking we cannot continue
to search indefinitely.
At this point you should search through the house of your body-mind-spirit
a few times with greac concentmcion and systematic thoroughness, with my help
and the help of many t:l(pcrts who have guided me through this practice. If, during
th.is process, you find a ''self," then enjoy it to the fo U. If, however. as l
suspect will be the case, you do not find what stands up solidly as your ''real
self' by the end of the process, then you will have to live with rhe fact that
there is no such thit1g. You will need to make the practical decision to tum
from seeking the "self' to explore instead the ramific:itions of being a relative
self without any absolute underpi1ming.
Thjs commitment to practicality in your quest for the self is of great importance
at the out\et and wiU have a significant impact on the success of the endeavor. Once
you have made the commitment in your own mjnd, you may begin.
Practice: Trying to Find Your "I"
WISDOM 451
You are now prepared co deepen your understanding of your selflessness. You
will be looking at yourself introspectively, trying to grasp exactly what your
essence is. When you do this practice well, you will begin to feel yourself dissolving,
just as l did at my mentor Geshe-la's house many years ago. You will ??tart
realjzing-gradually and also suddenly, in spurts-that you can't 6nd this mysterious
"self." Your strong teeling of having an absolute "I" is maddeningly elusive
when you t1y to pin it down precisely .
... In looking for your "sdf
,
" start with your body. Ask yourself. "Am I my
body?" In order to answer chis question, you must define your body. It is
composed at least of your five sense orgaJ1s, right? Your skin and sensitive inner
surfaces constitute the couch organ, then you have your eyes for sight, ymir nose
for smell, your ears for heating, and your tongue for taste. So first let's explore aJI
of your senses together, your sensory system.
Identify the sound sense. What do you hear-a dog barking, a phone 1inging,
music playing, or perhaps jusr rhe sound of your own breathing? Now
notice the visual field. You an:: reading words on the page. What else do you
see? Whar are cbc images on the edge of your peripheral vision? How about
smell? Perhaps you smell the scene of incense burning, or of musty wood. Do
you taste anything: something you ace a while ago, tea you drank, or just the
taste of your own mouth? The tactile field is everythiJ1g touching your skin,
including ocher parts of your skin couching your skin. Your hand may be resting
on your knee, for example. Your bottom is touching a pillow. Just identify all
the sensations, the textures, smells, tastes, sounds, and sight.??.
Now notice your inremal sensations, like the breakfast in your tummy. You
might have a slight pain in your back or your knee. Maybe your foot is falling
asleep. and you're annoyed because there's a slightly painful sensation there. You
mjght have a pleasurable sensation in some part of you chat is feeling good if, for
example. you worked m1t yesterday or had a massage.
Recognize that for each of these sensations you are experiencing, you are
receiving data from the outside world. The sensations are not all coming from
your own body. So your body is not just inside your skin; your body is both
your organs and the field of all inconling sense objects. It's everything you are
seeing and hearing and smelling and tasting and touching. Ir's the chair or pillow
you're sitting on. The words you are reading on this page. The incense d1ifring
into your nostrils. If you look ac one sensation, you realize tbnt you are sharing
yom t11:lte1iaJ body with the outside 'vvorld. Say, for example, you are looking at
ljght bouncing off a table. That light is a part of your shared sensory system, and
therefore part of your body. roo.
So already you have begun to expand your self-definition, just by looking at
your five ??enses. Suddenly you are not just something that sits there imide your
skin. You are your environment as well. Your body interfoses with the outside
world th::u you perceive with your senses. All of our bodies are totally overlapping,
all the time. Do you see? And when you think, "this is 'me' over here
inside this skin,'' you are unrealistically thinking that 'T' am not connected to
452 ROBERT THURMAN
others through the sense perceptions that we have in common. But you are connected,
even before you talk to them or chi11k anything about them, through
your shared environment.
Now you can move to the next level of analysis of the self, which exists at
the level of your nlind. First is the sensational syscem, the feelings of pleasure,
pain, and numbness associated with sense perceptions of sights, som1ds, smells,
tastes, textures, and mental sense inner objects. When you experience these six
kinds of objects, you react as pleased, irritated, or indifferent. Mentally inventory
your sensations 'at the moment, and notice how you react at this basic feeling
level. Notice that this heap of sense-reactions has no self-core within it.
Next is your conceptual system., your ideas, mental maps, and internal
images. You have a picture of yow-self as you exist in the world. You have a
concept of yourself as human, not animal. You have a picture of yourself as
male or female. You have a body image, and an image of each pare of your
body. You have a concept of your identity as a teacher, a manager, a doctor,
or whatever. You have a concept of yourself as successfiil or as a failure. Inventory
th.is mass of ideas and images and notice chat you have whole clouds of
pictures and concepts. But is thjs incredibly chaotic mass of images and words
and diagrams and maps and so forth that is your conceptual system the rea]
"you"? Your perception of yourself changes aU the time, depending on your
mood, whom you're with, or what you're doing. Sometimes you think, "I'm a
high-powered executive," whereas other times you th.ink, 'Tm just a tiny speck
on a tiny planet of six billion people." So surely your conceptual system cannot
be your "self." The "you" self is not any of these ideas, since it seems to be the
entity that is noticing all of them.
At che fourth level of analysis, find your emotional system. You are constantly
reacting to all of these images and notions. Right now, you're probably
feeling a bit irritated with me. You're thinking to yourself, "Why is he making
me do th.is? Why doesn't he just crack a joke? Let's have some fun. What is th.is
terrible business of exploring the self, 'discoveri11g selflessness'? How is this
helping me?" And so on and so forth. You're feeling annoyed and anxious and
confused. Or maybe you're just feebng bored. Anyway, your emotions are there
in your nlind, always functioning, but always changing. You can take a peek at
them now, as they swirl around in your heart and head, and you can see that
they are not fo:ed. You are not defined by your emotions. They are not the
elusive "self' you're seeking.
Lastly, turn your :ittention to your consciousness system. It is the most
important system of all. You see at once how it is a buzzing, blooming, swirling
mass of subtle energies. Nothing is fixed, nothing stable within it. With your
mental consciousness, you hop from one sense to another. You analyze your
ideas, you focus internally on your emotions and thoughts, and you can even
focus on being thought-free. Your consciousness aims itself at being free of
thought by the thought of being free of thought. How strange! As you inventory
your consciousness, don't allow yourself to rest with a bare awareness, but go a
bit deeper-explore further with your analytic attention. Ask yourself, "Who is
th.is supposedly rigid 'self? Is it the same self right now as the one who woke up
WISDOM 453
grnmbling this morning, preparing that cup of coffee, rnshing to get ready,
quickly brushing its teeth? Is it the same self who was born a tiny, unaware,
helpless infant years ago? Who is the 'me' who knows my name, who knows
what I w:rnt, where 1 am, and what L'm doing? Who is the 'me' who knows
r'm ;m American, who knows I'm a-whatever: a Buddhist or a Christian or
an atheist? Where is that person now? Where is that absolute, unchanging structure?"
You can see how your self-consciousness is a buzzing, blooming, swirling
mass of confusion-nothing is fixed, nothing stable within it. You can barely
remember what you did yesterday morning-I can't remember at all at my
age! So how can you possibly have a rigid self? See how releasing these sores of
thoughts can be! ...
The deepest stage of awareness comes when your consciousness begins to
tum inward to gaze upon itscl.t?? At first it thinks, "I now know that these sensory,
mental, and emotional systems looming before me are not the 'self,' they
are not ·me.' But the awareness that looks at them, that contemplates and invesrigates
them, that is my 'sel£'" And yet you soon discover that you are mistaken
even in this conclusion. The moment you begin to exam.ine your own conscious
mind, you engage in a whirling, internal dervish-dance where your awareness
spi.ns round and round upon itself. This contemplation can be dizzying, nauseating,
painful, and even a bit fiighrening, as the felt "sdf' disappears and evades its
own attention. You can never catch it, even as you become more expetienced at
chis meditation and come back co this place again -and again. Time and again you
will feel frustrated by your contiJJued failure to come up with a result. Yet you
must not lose heart. You must remember that looking for your "self'' is the most
important thing you can ever do in your evolutionary development. You must
keep faith that you are on the brink of a quantum leap; you are so close co
awakening.
As you enter into this confusing realm of spinning self-seeking, be careful
not to make the mistake Descartes made by witbdrawing from it alJ with some
sort of decision about "you" being the subject and therefore not any sort of findabk
object. Also. be careful not to full into the nihilistic trap of withdrawing
from the spinning by deciding that alJ is nothing after aU and so naturally the
self-sense is an ilJusion. Keep whirling upon your "self' as long as you feel ::ibsolutely
there is a self to whirl upon, to look at, to catch. Put your full tn1thseeking,
analytic energy into the d1ive to find it.
Eventually, you will expe1ience a gradual melting process. The whirling ,vilJ
slowly dissolve without fear: you won't sh1ink back in tetTOr of foiling into an
abyss-like void because you are already overcoming your self-addiction. You
control the tendeocy co sh1ink back in te1Tor of faJling into a loom.ing void by
your drilling, whfrling energy of awareness itself You dissolve your fea1ing subject,
the object for which you are feeling fear, and the imagined nothingness that
only the pseudo-self-addiction want?? you co fear. However fully you feel such
processes at fast, what happens to you is that, as you begin to melt, your drive
intensity lessens, you feel buoyed by a Boating sensation coming from within
your nerves and cells, from within your subjectivity as well as your object-field.
At some point, you lose your sense of self entirely, as if you were a field of open
454 ROBERT THURMAN
space. Like Neo and his colleagues in the movie 7711' Matrix when rhey entered
one of the computer-generated training fields, you will fmd yourself standing in
a bl:mk white space-except in your ca??e, in chis transcending motm:nc, you
break free from your "digital residual self-image." You will be only the blank
whjte spa¼e, a bare awareness of yourself as a boundless entity. Dissolving into
thjs space, you'll feel intense bliss, a sense of extreme relic[
When you .first melt into the spacious experience of freedom, it is enthralling.
like emerging from a dark cave into infinite light. You fed magnificent, vasr,
and unbound. lf you inadvertently faU into this state unprepared by an-iving
there too quickly, you may be tempted to think that you have an-ived at tht:
absolute reality, and thjs is a bit of a danger. You might think, feeling it nonverbally
at this stage, that you've conquered the ditTeremiatcd universe and realized
irs true "nothingness," experiencing it as such a profound and liberating release
that you never again wane any contact with the real world. Remember, however,
that nothingness is not your ulcimatc go:11-you are not trying to escape
reality. but to embrace it. If you reach this space of release gi??1clua1Jy through
the repeated whirling of your self rnming upon itself, then you'll be able to
enjoy the vastness and magnificence without losing awareness that it is only
another relational condition. You'll realize that the great emptiness is ultimately
empty of itself; it is not reality. either.
Since you are the void, you do not need to remain in the void, and your
original self-sense slowly reemerges within the universe of persons and things.
Bur you arc aware that it is not the same ''self' you had before-it is forever
different, now become infinite and unbound. You have changed. You now perceive
your "self' consciously, living with it yet maintaining an educated distance
from it. You are like one of the characters in The i'vlatrix, present and active as
real being, yet at the same time realizing chat che apparent reality that sunounds
you is only illusory. AU that was apparent becomes transparent.
One of the most significam changes you will notice upon discove1ing your
selflessness is that your sense of being separate from everyone else has now
eroded. Your new awareness enables you to perceive others ::is equal to yourself.
a patt of you, even. You can see yourself as they see you, and cxpe1ience
empachicaJly how they perceive themselves as locked within themselves. You
have anived at the doorway co universal compassion. and it frees you from
being locked away behind a fixed point-of-awareness and opens you to a sort
of fidd awareness wherein others are really just rhe same as you while simultaneously
relationally different. Through the sense of sameness, you feel their pains
as if they were your own: when they hurt, you hurt. Yet through the sense of
relational difference and balanced responsibility, you natllrally feel moved to free
them from rheir pains, just as you mow automatically to elimjnace your own
pains. When your hand is burned by a hot pot handle. you react at once to
pLilJ away from che heat, you plunge it into cold water, you rush to find ice.
You respond instinctively to remove the pain. You don't consider it a sel£1ess
act of compassion for your hand. You just do it through your neural connection
to your hand. Your ne,v open awareness feels ochers' hands through a similar
sense of natural connection.
I.
WISDOM 455
QUESTIONS FOR MAKING CONNECTIONS
WITHIN THE READING
Choose one important te1111 from Thurman's essay, such as 11inm11a,
1101hi11.i!11css, cmp1i11ess, e,,f??{!hte11me111, 111edi1alia11, compassia11, ((!11vriwcc, sclj;
fwppi11ess, orJreer/0111. Then, by tracing Thum1an's use of the term
throughout the chapter, offer your own explanation of its meaning.
While commonplace definitions for all of these terms may be found in a
dictionary, here you are being asked co explain the meaning of the term as
Thurman uses ir. Then you might contrast Thurman's use of the tem1 with
more corn111onplacc understandings. lg11oraiffe, for example, has a special
significance in the context of lJuddhist thought. How does it differ from
(1!11ora11ce as we norrnall y define it?
Instead of discussing the soul. Thum1an focuses on the mind. How is
"mind" different from "soul"? Where is the mind located, according co
Tlrnnnan? ls ic the s::une as the brain? What are some of the broader
implications of Thunnan 's attention to the 111.ind instead of the soul? If
the mind is tr:111sfo1111ed, can the essence of the person remain somehow
immune to change? Conversely, if a person's mental habits and perceptions
remain unchanged, is it possible to imagine that the essence of the person
has still been altered somehow? We might ordina1ily think of each person
as endowed with an individual soul, but is the mind individualized in the
same way?
3. ThLU111an speaks about "enlightenment" instead of "redemption" or
"salvation." How does "enlightenment" differ from "salvation"? Wh::i t are
the differences bet\veen Thmman's emphasis on the experience of
"selflessness" and the famous Greek dictum "Know thyself''? Could
selflessness qualify as a fom1 of self-knowledge? Could it qualify as a form
of redemption or saJvacion?
QUESTIONS FOR WRITING
I. Buddhism is often studied on the college level in courses offered by
philosophy and religion departments. Judging f rom Thurman's account,
what elements does Buddhism have in common with philosophy? With
religion? Or, judging from Thurman's account, would you say that
Uuddhism has some elements in common with science, which is based on
empiricaJ observation? In what ways might Buddhism be closer to a science
than to a reJjgion or a philosophy?
2. Whar are the social and political implications of Thurman's argument? How
would the cuJcivation of "wisdom" as he demi bes it affect people in a
competitive, consumption-oriented society like om own? Is Thun11an's
brand of meditation compatible with democracy and the idea that all of us
456 ROBERT THURMAN
are equal? How might the cultivation of wisdom influence the current
political cJimate? Would the climate become less adversarial? Less driven by
rigid ideology? Or would people who cultivate wisdom simply wash their
hands of politics?
QUESTIONS FOR MAKING CONNECTIONS
... BETWEEN READINGS
1. In "When { Woke Up Tuesctiy Morning, lt Was Friday,'' Martha Stout
desc1ibes fom1s of "djvided'' or "dissociated" consciousness that are produced
by severely craumatic events. One of Scout's patients, whom she calls
"Julia," becomes so dissociated from rhe here and now chat whole days
never get recorded in Julia's memo1y. After rereading Stout's analysis of
dissociation, decide whether or not the form of meditation that Thurman
describes might help someone like Julia. ls it possible that meditation as
Thumian describes it could actuaJJy produce dissociation in healthy people?
What aspects of meditation might be most helpful to people like Julia? Is it
possible that dissociation is actually more widespread than most people even
realize? ls trauma really necessary co produce severely divided consciousness,
or do certain features of contemporary life help co produce it-television,
commercial radio, video games, and movies?
2. In what ways is reading like the practice of meditation? To explore this
question, draw p1ima1ily on Azar Nafisi's chapter from Rendi11g Lolita i11
Tehran. At a key moment in her account, Nafisi makes this observation:
Whoever we were-and it was not really important what religion
we belonged to, whether we wished to wear the veil or not,
whether we observed certain religious no1111S or not-we had
become tbe figment of s0111.eone elsr.::'s dreams . A stern ayatoUah, ,1
self-proclaimed philosopher-king, had come co rule our land.
How, accordi11g to Nafisi, can the reading of fiction help us throw off the
veils-literal and vi1tual-that others have imposed on us? Does reading as
she desciibes involvr.:: its own fom1 of mental cultivation, comparable in
some ways to the 1neditational practice Thurman describes? Does reading
allow Naftsi and her students to experience a form of "selflessness"' How
can we tell the difference between the veils imposed on us and che persons
we really are? ls it possible that "selflessness" allows us to create an identity
of our own?