An Army of One: Me
One day when my mother was driving me to school in 1986, Whimey Housron's
hit song "The Greatest Love of All" was warbling our of the weak speakers of
our Buick srarion wagon with wood t1im. I asked my morher what she thought
the song was abouc. "The greatest love of all-it has to be about children."
she said.
My mother was sweet, but wrong. The song does say that children are the
future (always good to begin with a strikingly original thought) and that we
should teach them well. Abouc world peace, may be? Or great literatureNope.
Children should be educated about the beauty "inside," the song declares.
We all need heroes, Whitney sings, but she never found "anyone to fulfill my
needs," so she learned to depend on (,vait for it) "me.'' The chorus then
declares, "learning co love yourself is the greatt.:st love of all.''
This is a stunning reversal in attitude from previOU$ generations. Back
then, respect for ochers was more important than respect for yourself. The rern,
"self-esteem" wasn't widely used until the lace l 960s, and didn't become
talk-show and dinner-cable conversation until che t 980s. By the 1990s, it was
everyv.rhere.
Take. for example, the band Offipring's rockingly in-everent 1994 ritT
"Self-Esteem." The song describes a guy whose girlfriend ''says she wants only
me ... Then I wonder why she sleeps wich my tiiends." (Hnunm.) But he's blase
about it-it's OK, really, since he's ':iust a sucker with no self-esteem."
By the mid-1990s, Offsp1ing could take it for granted that most people
knew the term "self-esteem," and knew they were supposed co have it. They
also knew how co diagnose themselves when they didn't have it. Offipring's
ironic self-parody demonstrates a high level of understanding of the concept,
the satire suggesting that this psychological self-examination is rote and can thus
be performed with tongue planted fimily in cheek.
In the years since, attention to the topic of self-esteem h,1s rapidly expanded.
A search for "self-esteem" in the books section of amazon.com yielded 105,438
ent1ies in JuJy 2005 (sample tides: T1te Self-Esteem Workbook, Breaking the Chain of
Lorv Self-Esteem, Ten Days to Self-Esteem, 200 Ways 10 Raise a Girl's Self-Esteem).
Magazine articles on self-esteem are as common as e-mail spam for Viagra. Ladies'
Hoille jo,m,a/ told readers to "Learn co Love Yourself!" in March 2005, 1 while
Pare11ting offered "Proud to Be Me!" (apparently the exclamation point is
required) in April, listing "5 simple ways to help your child love who he is. "2
TV and radio talk shows would be immediately shut down by the FCC if "selfesteem"
were on the Lise of ba1med words. The American Academy of Pediat1ics
guide to ca1ing for babies and young children uses the word "self-esteem" ten
times in the space of seven pages jn the first chapter, and that doesn't even
count the numerous mentions of self-respecc, confidence, and belief in onesel£ 3
488 JEAN TWENGE
How did self-esteem transform from an obscure academic term to -a fam.iliar
phrase that pops up in everything from women'?? magazines to song lytics to
celeb1;ty interviews? The story actuaUy begins centuries ago, when humans
barely had a concepc of a self at all: your marriage was an:anged, your profession
detennined by your parents, your actions dictated by strict religious standards.
Slowly over the cemuries, social strictures began to loosen and people started
to make rnore choices for themselves. Eventually, we anived at the modern concept
of tlie inclividual as an autonomous, free person.
Then came the 1970s, when the ascendance of the self truly exploded into
the American ·consciousness. In contrast to previous ethics of honor and duty,
Baby Boomer ideals focused instead on meaning and self-fulfiJlment. In his J 976
bestseUer, Yv11r £rro11eo11s Zo11cs, Wayne Dyer suggests that the popular song ''You
Are the Sunshine of My Life" be retitled "I Am the Sunshine of My Life." Your
love for yourself, he says, should be your "first love." The 1970 allego1y,Jo11at/ia11
Li11i11gsto11 Seag11/I, describes a bird bored with going "from shore to food and back
again." Instead, he wanes to enjoy flying, swooping through the air co follow "a
higher meaning, a higher purpose for life," even though his actions get him exiled
from his flock. The book, originally rejected by nearly every major publishing
house, became a nmaway bescseller a.?? Americans came to agree with the idea
that life should be fulfllling and focused on the needs of the self The seagulls
in the animated movie Fi11di11g Nemo were still otJ message almost twenty-five
years later: all that comes om of their beaks is the word "mine."
Boomers and Their "Journey" into the Self
Because the Boomers dominate our cuJture so much, we have to understand
them first so we can see how they differ from the younger Generation Me.
Wl1y aren't the Boomers-the Me Generation in the I 970s-the real Generation
Me? lt's about what you explore as a young adult versus what you're born ro
and t.1ke for granted.
For the Boomers, who grew up in the 1950s and I 960s, self-focus was a new
concept, indjvidualism an uncharted tenitory. In hjs 1981 book New R11les:
Seard1iii_{! for Se!f-F11/fillme111 i11 a World Turned Upside Dow11, Daniel Yankelovich
describes young Boomers struggljng with new questions: How do you make
decisions in a marriage with two equal partners? How do you focus on yourself
when your parents don't even know what that means? The Boomers in che book
sound like people d1iving around in circles in the dark, desperately searching for
something. The world was so new that there were no road signs, no maps to
point the way to this new fulfillment and individuality.
That's probably why many Boomers talk about the self using language fuJI of
abstraction, introspection, and "growth." New things caJJ for this kind of meticulous
thought, and require the idea that the process will take time. Thus Boomers
talk about ''rny journey," «my need to keep growing," or ''my unfulfilled
potentials." Sixties activist Todd Gitlin called the Boomer quest the "voyage to
the interior." Icky as they are to today's young people, these phrases drum with
AN ARMY OF ONE: ME 489
motion and time, portraying sdf-focus as a continuous project that keeps evolving
as .13oomers look around for tme meanjng. In a 1976 New York Ma_eazi11e article,
Tom Wolfe desc1ibed the "new dream" as "remakjng, remode]jng, elevating and
polishing one's very self ... and observing, studying, and doting on ic."?? Sixties
radical Jerry Rubin wrote that he tried just about every fad of the I 970s (rol6ng,
est, yoga. sex therapy, finding his inner child); one of the chapters in his book
Cro111i11g (Up) at Thirty-Seven is caUed ·'Searchi1Jg for Myself"
Such introspection primarily surfaces today in the speech of New Agers,
therapists who have read too much Maslow, and over-45 Boomers. When
asked what's next in her life, Kim Uasingcr (born in 1953) replies, "Watching
what the rest of my journey is going to be about."" 111 answer to the same question.
Sarah Ferguson, Duchess of York (born in l 959) says: "My coming to stay
jn Ame1ica for a few months is like rny blossoming into my rrue Sarah, into my
true self. And I'm just cOJning to leam about her myself."(' Not all Boomers talk
this way, of course, but enough do chat it's an immediately recognizable generational
tic. It's also a guaranteed way co get a young person to roll her eyes. She
might aJso then tdJ you to lighten up.
Many authors, from William Strauss and Neil Howe in Ce11cmrio11s co Sreve
GiUon in Boomer Natio11, have noted that abstraction and spirituaJiry aJ·e the primary
hallmarks of rhe Boomer generation. Gillon describes Boomers as having a
"morafatic style" and devotes a chapter to Boomers' "New Fundamenralism. "7
Whether joining traditional churches or exploring medication or yoga. Boomers
have been fascinated witb the spiritual for four decades.
Even Boomers who don't adopt New Age language seek higher meanin.g in
the new religion of consumer products-thus the yuppie revolution. In Bobos i11
Paradise, David Brooks demonstrates that -upper-class Boomers have poured their
wealth into things like cooking equipment. which somehow feels more moral
and meaningfol than previous money sinks like jewelry or furs. Even food
becomes "a barometer of virtue," Brooks says, as 1960s values are '·selectively
updated .... Gone are the sixties-era things chat were fi.111 and of interest to teenagers,
like Free Love, and retained are all the things that might be of interest to
middle-aged hypochond1iacs, like whole grains. "8
The Boomers' imerest in the abstract and spiritual shows up in many different
soLu-ces. fn 1973, 46% of Boomers said they "focused on internal cues. "9
Only 26% of I 990s young people agreed. Thirty percent of Boomers said that
·'creativity comes from within." versus t8% of young people in the l 990s. JO
Even stronger evjdence comes from a nationaJ survey of more than 300,000 college
freshmen. [n 1967, a whopping 86% of incoming college stttdenrs said that
'·developing a meaningful philosophy of life" was an essential life goal.11 Only
42% of GenMe freshmen in 2004 agreed, cutting the Boomer number in half.
I'm definitely a member of my generation in this way; despite being an academic,
I'm not sure I know what a "meaningful philosophy of life" even is.
Jerry Rubin does-if you can underst:ind him. "fnstead of seeking with the
expectation of finding. I expe1ience my seeking as an end in itself," he writes.
"I become one with my seeking, and merge wich the moment."12 OK, jerry.
Let us know when you've re-entered the Earth's atmosphere.
490 JEAN TWENGE
While up there, maybe Jeny met Aleta St. James. :-1 57-year-old woman
who gave birth to twins in '.WO-L She explained her tmusual actions by saying,
"My whole world is about manitesting, so 1 decided to manifest children."13 It'
not su1prising that an enterprising GenMe member put together a list of books
on amazon.com titled "Tired of 13aby Boomer Self-Righteousness?"
Boo1.iers display another uniqu<:: and somewhat ironic tr;:iit: a srrong emphasis
on group meetings. B001m:rs followed iD the footsteps of their communityminded
clders??they just joined the Weathcnncn instead of the Elks Lodge. This
is one of the many reasons why Boomers arc not the tnie Generation Me-­
almost eve1ything they did happened in groups: Vietnam protests. marches for
feminism. consciousness raising, assertiveness training, discos, even s<::minars Like
est. Maybe it felt safer to explore the sdf within a group-perhaps it felt less
radical. No one seemed to catch the irony that it might be difficult co find
your own unique direction in a group of other people. Even Boomers' trends
and sayings belied their reliance on groups: "Don't trust anyone over 30" groups
people by age, as did the long hair many Boomer men adopted in the lace 1960s
and early 1970s to distinguish them??elves from older folks. In a 1970 song, David
Crosby says he decided not to cut his hair so he could "let my freak flag fly.·· If
you've got a flag, you're prob:ibly a group. 13oomers may have thought they
invented indjviduaLism, but like any inventor, they were followed by those
who cr1.1ly perfected the ::irt.
Boomers took only the first tentative steps in the direction of self-focus,
rather than swaUo..,ving ir whole at birth. Mosr Boomers never absorbed it at all
and settled down early to marry and raise families. Tho e who adopted the ways
of the self as young adults speak the language with an accent: the accenr of
absrracrion and ":iourneys." They had to reinvent their way of chinking when
already grown, and thus see sdf-focus as a "process." In his book, Rubin quotes
a friend who says. "We are the first generation to reincarnate ourselves in our
own lifetime."
The Matter-of-Fact Self-Focus of Generation Me
Generation Me had no need to reincarnate ourselves; we were born into a world
that already celebrated the individual. The self-focus that blossomed in che 1970s
became mundane and con1monplace over the next two decades, and GenMe
accepts it like a fish accepts water. lf Boomers were making their way in the
uncharted world of the self, GenMe has ptinted seep-by-step directions from
Yahoo! Maps-and most of the time we don't even need them, since the culture
of the self is our hometown. We don't have to join groups or talk of journeys,
because we're already there. We don't need to "polish" the self, as Wolfe said,
because we take for granted that it's already shiny. We don't need ro look
inward; we already know what we will find. Si.nee we were small children, we
were taught to put ourselves first. That's just the way the world works-why
dwell on it? Let's go to the mall.
GenMe's focus on the needs of the individual is not necessarily self-absorbed
or isolationist; instead, it's a way of moving through the world beholden to few
AN ARMY OF ONE: ME 491
social mies and with the unshakable bdief rhar you're important. It's also nm the
same as bei.ng "spoiled," which implies that we always get what we want;
though this probably does desc,ibe some kids, it's not the essence of the trend.
(GenMe's expectations are so great and our reality so challenging that we wiJI
probably get less of what we want than any previous generation). We simply
take it for gr:inted that we should all feel good about ourselves, we arc all special,
and we alJ deserve to follow ou.r dreams. GenMe is straightfon;yard and
unapologetic about our self-focus. ln 2004's Co11q11eri1{f! Your Q11arterl{fe Crisis,
Jason, 25, relates how be went through some tough times and decided he
needed to d1a11ge things in his life. His new motto was "Do what's best for
Jason. l had to make 111e happy; I had co do what was best for myself in every
· • nf4 s1tuat1011.
Our practical orientation toward the self sometimes leaves us with a ctistaste
for 13oomer abstraction. When a character in the 2004 novel Solllerl1i11g Borro111ed
watched the 1980s show t/1irty.rn111e,/1i11,g as a teen, she wished che Boomer characters
would "stop pondering the meaning of life and stare making grocery lists."
15 The matter-of-fact attitude of GenMe appears in everyday bnguage as well--a
language that stilJ includes the abSLTact concept of self, bm uses it in a very simple
way, perhaps because we lea.med the language as children. We speak the language
of the self as our native rongue. So much of the "common sense" advice
that's given these days includes some variation on "sdf':
• Worried about how to act in a social situation? ·'Just be yourself.''
• What's the good thing about your :ilcoholism/drng addiction/murder convictio11?
"I learned a lot about myself."
• Concerned about your perfo1111ance? ''Ud.ieve in yourself." (Ofi:en folJowed
by "and anything is possible.'")
• Should you buy the new pnir of shoes, or get the nose ring? ''Yes, express
your self"
• Why should you leave the unfulfi.Uing rebtionship/quit the bo1ing job/tell
off your mother-in-law? "You have to respect yourself"
• Trying co get 1id of a b::id habit? "Be honest with your;elf."
• Confused about rhe best time to date or get married? "You have to love
yourself before you c;m love someone else."
• Should you express your opinion? ''Yes, stand up for yourself,.
Americans use these phrases so often that we don't even notice them :1t1ymore.
Dr. Phil, the ultimate in plainspoken, no-nonsense advice, uttered both
"respect yoursdf' and ''stop lying to yourself' with.in seconds of each other on
a Today show segment on New Year's resolutions. If, One of his bestselling books
is entitled Sclj' Maf/£•rs. We rake these phrases and ideas so much for granted, it's
as if we learned them in our sleep as children, like the perfectly conditioned citizens
in Aldous Huxley's Brave Ne111 ltllorlrf.
These aphorisms don't seem absurd to us even when, sometimes. they are.
We taJk about self-improvement as if the self could be given better drywall or a
492 JEAN TWENGE
The Self Across the Generations
Baby Boomers
Self-fulfillment
Journey, potentials, searching
Change the world
Protests and group sessions
Abstraction
Spirituality
Philosophy of life
Generation Me
Fun
Already there
Follow your dreams
Watching TV and surfing the Web
Practicality
Things
Feeling good about yourself
new coat of pajnt. We read self-help books as if the self could receive taxdeductible
donations. The Se[{ even has its own magazine. Psychologist Martin
Seligman says that the traditional self'.-rcsponsible, hardworking, stern-h:1s
been replaced with the "California self," "a self that chooses, feels pleasure and
pain, dictates action and even has things like esteem. efficacy, and confidcnce."17
Media outkts promote the self relentlessly; r was amazed at how often 1 heard
the word "self' used in the popular media once I started looking for it. A careful
study of news srories published or aired between 1980 and 1999 found a large
increase in self-reference words (I, me, mine, and myself) and ::i marked decrease
in collective words (humanity, count1y, or crowd). 18
Young people have learned these self-lessons very weJJ. [11 a letter to her fans
in 2004, Britney Spears, 23, listed her prio1ities as "Myself, my husband, Kevin,
and starting a family.
,
,,,, If you had to re:id that twice to get my point, it's
because we take it for granted that we should put ourselves first on our list of
ptioriries-it would be blasphemy if you didn't (unless, of course, you have low
self-esteem). Twenty-year-old Ma1ia says her mother often reminds her ro consider
what ocher people will think. "It doesn't matter what other people think,"
Maria insists. "What really matters is how l perceive myself The real person I
need to please is myself"
Smart marketers have figured this out, coo. fn the lace 1990s, Prudential
replaced its longtime insurance slogan "Get a Piece of the R.ock'' with the nakedly
individualistic "Be Your Own Rock. "20 The United States Am1y, perhaps tl1e last
organization one might expect to focus on the individual instead of the group, has
followed suit. Their standard slogan, adopted in 2001, is "An Anny of One."
Changes in Self-Esteem: What the Data Say
The data I gathered on self-esteem over time mirror the social tl"ends perfectly.
My colleague Keith Campbell and I looked at the responses of 65,965 college
students to the Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale, the most popular measure of general
self-esteem among adults.2 1 I held my breath when I analyzed these data for
the first time, but I needn't have won-ied: the change was eno1mous. By the
AN ARMY OF ONE: ME 493
mjd-1990s, th.: average GenMe college man had higher self-esteem than 86% of
college men in 1968. The average mjd-1990s college woman had higher selfesteem
than 71% of Boomer college women. Between the 1960s and the
1990s, college students were increasingly likely to agree that "I take a positive
atticude toward myself' and "On the whole, I. am satisfied with mysel(" Other
sources verify this rrend. A 1997 survey of teens asked, "In general, how do you
feel about yourself?" A stunning 93% answered "good." Of the remainder, 6%
said they felt "nor very good," and only 1 % admitted they felt "bad" about
rhemselves.22 Another survey found that 9 l% of teens described themselves as
responsible. 74% as physically attractive, and 79'¾, as "ve1y incelligenc."23
Children's self-esteem scores tell a different but even more intiiguing story.
We examined the responses of 39,353 children, most ages 9 co l3, on the
Coopersmith Self-Esteem Inventory, a scale written specifically for children.14
During the 1970s-when the nation's chikfren shifted from the late Baby
Boom to the early years of GenX-kids' self-esteem declined, probably because
of societal instability. Rampant divorce, a wobbly economy, so:11ing c1ime rates,
and swinging singles culture madt> the l 970s a difficult time to be a kid. The
average child in l 979 scored lower than 81 % of kids in the mid-1960s. Over
this time, children were less likely to agree \>.1 1th statements like 'Tm pretty sure
of myself' and 'Tm pretty happy" and more likely to agree that "things are all
mi.xed up in my life.'' The individualism that was so enthralling for teenagers and
adults in the I 970s didn't help kids-and, if their parents suddenly discovered
self-fulfiJJment, it might have even hurt them.
But after 1980, when GenMe began to enter the samples, chiJdren's selfesteem
took a sharp turn upward. More and more during the 1980s and 1990s,
children were saying that they were happy with themselves. They agreed that
'Tm easy to like'' and "I always do the right thing." By the mfrl-1990s, children's
self-esteem scores equaled, and often exceeded, children's scores in the markedly
more stable: Boomer years before l 970. The average kid in the mid-1990s-right
in the heart of GcnM.e-had higher self-esteem than 73% of kids in 1979, one of
the last pre-GenMe years.
This is a bit of a mystery, however. The United States of the 1980s to rnjdl
990s never approached the kid-fiiendJy stability of the 1950s and early 1960s:
violent c1ime hit record highs, divorce was still at epidemic le.vels, and the economy
had not yet reached its late-1990s boom. So without the calm and prosperity
of earlier decades, why did children's self-esteem increase so dramaticaJJy
during the l 980s and 1990s?
The Self-Esteem Curriculum
The short answer is that they were taught it. In the yea.rs after 1980, there was a
pervasive, society-wide effort to increase children's self-esteem. The Boomers
who now filled the ranks of parents apparently decided that children shouJd
always feel good about themselves. Research on program5 to boost self-esteem
first blossomed in the 1980s, and the number of psychology and education journal
articles devoced to self-esteem doubled between the I 970s and the I 980s.25
JournaJ articles on self-esteem increased another 52% during the 1990s, and the
494 JEAN TWENGE
BE
A
Coloring &
-
TEr
Activity Book
To Tho Parcnl
Thtt c:c,1onn,g ?? wp crvated to ,hengJhtn 10411 chilrct'• '""'Ing
All.lwhie. Ute)' han fun It wih 1f\W'lt1,1n f01H chltd wtulo ock,c:aq
lhcffltnawoylholti>oyorellbleto""""'Ohtocl Wo'-1b81Hwil
be a pG011M lnftu..,.,. a,, you, c:I\Jld'• Ntly da??l
Parents are encouraged to raise their children's self-esteem even when kids are simply
coloring. Even the cat has high self-esteem on this coloring book cover. However, the dog
lacks a self-esteem boosting ribbon. He probably has low self-esteem-after all. he drinks
out of the toilet.
number of books on self-esteem doubled over the same time.26 Generation Me is
the first generation raised to believe that everyone should have high self-esteem.
Magazines, television talk shows, and books all emphasize the importance of
high self-esteem for children, usually promoting feelings that are actually a lot
closer to narcissism (a more negative trait usually defined as excessive selfimportan.
ce). One children's book, first published in 1991, is called 77,e Lovables
i11 the Ki11gdo111 qf Seff-Estee,n. "I AM LOY ABLE. Hi. lovable friend! My name is
Mona Monkey. I live iJ1 the Kingdom of Self-Esteem along with my friends the
Lovable Team," the book begins2 7 On the next page, children learn chat che
gates of the kingdom will swing open if you "say these words three times with
pride: 1 1111 lovable! I'm lovable! /'111 lovable!" (If I hear the word "lovable" one more
tin1e, I'm going to use my hefty self-esteem to pummel the author of this book).
AN ARMY OF ONE: ME 495
Another example is the "BE A WINNER Self-Esteem Coloring and
Activity Book" pictured in this chapter. Inside, children find activities and pictures
designed to boost their self-esteem, including colo,ing a "poster for your
room" that read?? "YOU AR.E SPECIAl." in yeUow, orange, and red letters
against a pL11-ple background. Another page asks kids to fiJJ in the bla11ks: "Accept
y_ur_e_f. You're a speciol person. Use p_si_iv_ thinking.'' A similar coloring
book is called ·'We Are All Special" (though this title seems to suggest thar
being special isn't so special). AJJ of this probably sounds like AJ Franken 's
Sawrdny N(1?.l11 Li11e character Stuart Smalley, an insecure, sweater-vest-we;iring
man who looks in the mirror :111d unconvincingly repeats, 'Tm good enough,
I'm sm:-m enough, :rnd doggone it, people like me." It sounds like it because
it's exactly the type of thing Franken was parodying. And it's everywhere.
Many school dist1icts across the country have specific programs designed to
illcrease children ·s self-esteem. most of which actllaJly build self-importance and
narcissism. One program is called "Self-Science: The Subject Is Me."2
R (Why
bother with biology' / 1
111 so much more interesting!) Another program, called
"Pumsy in Pursuit of Excellence." uses o dragon character to encourage children
to escape the "Mud Mind" they expe1ience when feeling bad about themselves.
lnsread, they hould strive to be in the "Sparkle Mind" and feel good about
themselves.29 The Magic Circle exercise designates one child a day to receive a
badge saying 'Tm great.'' The other children then say good things about the
chosen child, who later receives ::i w1itten list of aU of the praise. At the end of
the exercise, the child must then say something good about him- or herself.
Boomer children in che l 950s and J 960s gained self-.esreem naturally from a stable,
child-friendly society: GenMe's self-esteem has been actively cultivated for
its own sake.Jo
One Austin, Texas, father was startled to see his 6ve-year-old daughter
wearing a shirt that announced, 'Tm lovable and capable." All of che kindergarteners,
he teamed, recited this phrase before class, and they all wore the shirt to
school on F1idays. It seems the school started a bit coo young, however, becatL??e
tbe child then asked, "Daddy. all the kids are wondering, what does 'capable'
rnean?"31
Some people have wondered if the self-esteem trend waned after schools
began to put more emphasis on testing du1ing the lace l 990s. lt doesn't look
that way. Parenting books and magazines stress self-esteem as much as ever, and
a large number of schools continue to use self-esteem programs. The mission
statements of many schools explicicly announce that they aim to raise students'
self-esteem. A Google search for "elementary school mission statemenc selfesteern"
yielded 308,000 Web pages in January 2006. These schools are located
across the country, in cities, suburbs, small towns. and mral areas. "Building,"
"improving," ·'promoting," or "developing" self-esteem is a stated goal of
(among many ochers) New River Elemenca1y in New River, Arizona; Shady
Dell Elementary in Springfield, Missomi; Sheeder Elementary in Fruitport,
Michigan; Baxter Elementary in Ba.xter, Tennessee; R.ye Elementaiy in
Westchester County, New York; Copeland Elementary in Augusta, Georgia;
and Banff Elementary in Banff: Alberta. Canada. Private religious schools are
not immune: St. Wendelin Catholic Elementary in Fostoria, Ohio. aims to
"develop a feeling of confidence, self-esteem, and self-worth in our students."
496 JEAN TWENGE
Andersen Elementary i11 Rockledge, Florida, raises the bar. adding chat students
will "exh_ibit high self-esteem." So self-esteem must not just be promoted by
teachers, but must be actively exhibited by students.
As John Hewitt points out in Tlic lvf.-)1//, <?f Self Estee 111, the implicit message is
that self-esteem can be taught and should be taught. When self-esteem programs
are used, Hewitt notes, children are "encouraged to believe char ic is acceptable
and desirable co be preoccupied with oneselfland J praise oneself." In many cases,
he says, ir's not just encomaged but required. These exercises make selfimportance
mandatory, demanding of children that they love themselves. "The
child 11111st be taught to like himself or herself ... The child 11111s1 rake the reacher's
attitude himself or herself-'! am ,somebody!' 'I am capable and loving!'regardless
of what the child thinks. "-'2
Most of these programs encourage children to feel good about themselves for
110 particular reason. In one program, teachers are told co discburage children
from saying things like 'Tm a good soccer player" or 'Tm a good singer."33
This makes self-esteem contingent on perfom1ance, the program authors chide.
Instead, "we want to anchor self-esteem finnly to the child ... so that no matter
what the performance mjght be, the self-esteem remains high.'' In ocher words.
feeling good abour yourself is more important than good perfomiance. Children,
the guide says, should be caught "that it is who they are, not what they do. that is
important.'' Many programs encourage self-esteem even when things go wrong
or the child does something bad. In one activity, child1·en are asked to finish several
sentences, including ones beginnjng "I love myself even though ... " and
"I forgive myself for ... "34
Teacher training courses often emphasize that a child's self-esteem muse be
preserved above all else. A sign on the wall of one university's education department
says, "We Choose to Feel Special and Worthwhile No Matter W11at. "35
Perhaps as a result, 60% of teachers and 69% of school counselors agree that selfesteem
should be raised by "providing more unconditional validation of students
based on who they are rather than how they perform or behave. "3(, U nconditional
validation, to translate the educational mumbo-jumbo, means feeling good
about yourself no matter how you act or whether you learn anything or not. A
veteran second-grade teacher in Tennessee disagrees with this practice but sees it
everywhere. "We handle children much more delicately." she says. "They feel
good about themselves for no reason. We've given them thjs cotton-candy sense
of self with no basis in reality. "37
Although the self-esteem approach sounds like it might be especially popular
in liberal blue-state areas, it's common in red states as well, perhaps because it's
very si111-ilar to the ideas popularized by fundamentalist Christian churches. For
example, the popular Christian children's book Yo11 Are Special promotes the
s;1111e unconditional self-esteem emphasized in secular school programs. First
published in 1997, the book notes, "The world tells kids, 'You 're special if ...
you have the brains, the looks, the talent.' God tells them, 'You're special just
because. No qualifications necessary.' Eve1y child you know needs to hear this
one, reassuring truth." Traditional religion, of course, did have "qualifications"
and rules for behavior. Aduk5 hear chis message as we!J.38 In an article in L1dies
AN ARMY OF ONE: ME 497
Home ]011mnl, Christian author Rick Warren writes, "You can believe what
others say about you, or you can believe in yourself as does God, who says you
are truly acceptable, lovable, valuable, and capable. "39
Even programs not specifically focused on self-esteem often place the utmost
value on dtildren's self-feelings. Children in some schools sing songs with lyrics
like "Who I am makes a difference and all our dreams can come true" and "We
are beautiful, rnagnificenr, cour ageous, outrageous, and great!''40 Other students
pen a "Me Poem" or w1ite a mock TV ·'commercial" advertising themselves and
their good qualities. An elementa1y school teacher in Alabama makes one child
the focus of a "VIP for a week" project. 41 The children's museum in Laramie,
Wyoming, has a self-esteem exhibit where children are told to describe themselves
using positive adjectives.42
Parents often continue the self-esteem lessons their children have lean1ed in
school, perhaps because more chiJdren arc planned and cherished. The debut of
the birth control pill in the early 1960s began the trend toward wanted children,
which continued in the early I 970s as abortion became legal and cultural values
shifted toward children as a choice rather than a dmy. In the I 950s, it was considered
selfish not to have kids, but by the 1970s it was an individual decision. As
a result, more and more children were born to people who really 111m11td to
become parents. Parenrs were able to lavish more attention on each child as the
average number of children per family shrank from four to two. Young people
often say that their parents believed in building self-esteem. "My molli constantly
told me how special I was," said Natalie, 19. "No matter how l did, she
would tell me I was the best." Kristen, 22, said her parents had a "wonderful"
way of "telling me 'vvhat a great job l did and repeatedly telling me l was a very
special person." Popul:ir media l71ave] aJso promoted this idea endlessly, ofl:e,ing
up self-esteem as the cure for just about everything. In one episode of the family
drama 7th Hem1e11, one young character asks what can be done about war. The
father on the show, a minister, says, "-We can take a good look in the mi1Tor, and
when we see peace, that's when we 'IJ have peace on earth." The rest of the
episode featmcd each character smiling broadly to himself or herself in the mirror.
In other words, if we all just loved ourselves enough, ir would put an end to
war. (Not ortly is this tripe, but wars, if anything, are usually rooted in coo 11111c/1
love of self, land, and nation-not too little). But, as TV and movies have caught
us, loving yourself???? more important than anything else.
These e-fforts have had their intended impact. Don Tapscott, who interviewed
hundreds of people for hjs book Grorvi11g Up Digiml, notes, ''Chat moderators,
teachers, parents, and community ·workers who spend rime with fyoung
people] invariably told us that they think this is a confident generation who
think highly of rhemselves." 43 In a CBS News poll, the high school graduates
of 2000 were asked, "What makes you feel positive about yourself?" The most
popular answer, at 33%, was the tautological "self-esteem." School perfonnance
was a distant second at 18%. with popularity third at 13%. 44 Yet this is not surprising:
saying that having self-esteem makes you feel positive about yourselfforget
any actual reason-is exactly what the self-esteem programs have taught
roday's young generation since they were in kindergarten.
498 JEAN TWENGE
Yet when everyone wears a shirt that says "I'm Special," as some of the programs
encourage, it is a wide-open invitation to parody. The 1997 prcrniere episode
of MTV's animated show Daria featured a character named Jane, who
cracked, "I like having low self-esteem. It makes ,ne feel special.'' Later in the
episode, the teacher of a ·'self-esteem class" asks the students to "make a list of
ten ways the world would be a sadder place if you weren't in it.·· "ls that if we'd
never bcei1 born, or if we died suddenly and unexpectedly?'' asks one of the
student??. Wam??ng co get out of the rest of the class, Daria ;111d Jane recite tht:
answers to the self-esteem. "test": "The next time I start to feel bad about myself
fl will] stand before the mirror. look myself in the eye, and say, 'You are special.
No one ehe is like you.' ··45
By the time CenMc gets co coUege, these messages are rote. Hewitt, who
teaches at the University of Massachusetts, says his students are very excited
when they begin discussing self-esteem in his sociology class. But once he begins
co question the validity of self-esteem, the students' faces become glum and
interest wanes. Hewitt compares it to what might happen in church if a priest
suddenly began questioning the existence of God. After all, WG worship at th<:
altar of self-esteem and self-focus. "When the importance of self-esteem is challenged,
a major part of the contemporary American view of che world is chal-
1e nge d." He w1.t t wn. tes. -16
Girls Are Great
It is no coincidence chat the Daria episode parodying self-esteem programs features
[\VO girls. Feminist Gloria Steinem, who spent the 1970s and 1980s fighting
for practical rights like equal pay and maternity leave, spent che early 1990s promoting
her book Revolurion .from Within: A Book cif Seff-Esteem. Jn 1991, a study
by the American Association of University Women (MUW) announced that
girls "lose their self-esteem on the way co adolescence." This study was covered
in countless national news omlets and ignited a national conversation about teenage
girls and how they feel about themselves. Reviving Ophelia, a bestselling book
on adolescent girls, popula1ized this idea fi.nther, documenting the feelings of
self-doubt girls expe1ience as they move through jw1ior high and high school.
Apparently, girls' self-esteem was suffering a severe blow when they became
teenagers, and we needed to do something about it.
Before long, programs like the Girl Scouts began to focus on self-esteem
through their ·'Girls Are Great" program. Girls could earn badges like "Being
My Best'' and "Understanding Yourself and Others." Amanda, 22, says that her
Girl Scout troop spent a lot of rime on self-esteem. "We did workshops and
earned badges based around self-esteem building projects," she says. "We learned
that we could do anything we wanted, that it was good to express yourself, and
being different is good."
In 2002, the Girl Scout Council paired with corporate sponsor Unilever co
launch "Uniquely ME!" a self-esteem program to "address the critical nationwide
problem of low self-esteem among adolescent and preadolescent girls."
The program includes three booklets for girls ages 8 to 14, each including
AN ARMY OF ONE: ME 499
exercises on ''recognizing one's strengths :md best attributes" and "identifying
1 d I · ,.47 core va ues an persona mterests.
However, there is little evidence that girls· seH:.esteem dives at adolescence.
The AAUW study was seriously flawed, relying on unstandardized measures and
exaggerating srn:ill differences. In 1999, a carefully researched, comprehensive
study of sex difference5 in self-esteem was published in P.-yc/1()/o(!ical Bulleti11, the
most presrigious journal in the field. The smdy statistically summarized 216 previous
srndies on more than 97.000 people and concluded that the actual difference
between adolescern girls' and boys· self-esteem wa?? less than 4%--in other
words, extremely small.48 Exaggerating this difference might be unwise." W c
may create a self-fulfilling prophecy fur girls by telling them they'll have low
selt:.estcem,'' said Uniwrsiry of Wisconsin professor Janet Hyde, one of the
study authors. 4')
When my colleague Keith CampbelJ and I did a different analysis of
355 studies of l0S,318 people. we also found that girls' self:.esteem does not
fall precipitously at adolescence; it just doesn't rise as fast :is boys' self-em:em
during the teen ye:irs. There was no large drop in girls' self-esteem, and by college
the difference between men's and women's self-esteem was very smal1. 5n
Another meta-analysis, by my forn1cr student Brenda Dolan-Pascoe, found moderate
sex differences in appearance sdf-esteem, bur no sex differences at all in
academ.ic self-esteem. Girls also scored higher than boys in behavior self-esteem
and moral-ethical self-esteem. The achievements of adolescent girls also contradict
the idea that they retreat into self-doubt: girls eam higher grades than boys
at all school levels, and more go on co college.
In ocher words, adolescent girls don't have a self-esteem problem-there is
no "critical nationwide problem of low self-esteem among adolescent and preadolescent
girls" as the Girl Scouts claimed. Bur in a culture obsessed with teeling
good about ourselves, even the hint of a self-esteem deficit is enough to prompt
a nationwide outcry. The Girl Scout program premiered three years after the
L 999 comprehensive study found a nunuscule sex diflerence in self-esteem.
Why let an overwhelming mass of data get in the way of a program that sounded
good?
Self-Esteem and Academic Performance
There has also been a movement against "criticizing" children too much. Some
schools and teachers don't correct children's mistakes, afraid that this will damage
chjJdren's seJf-esteem. One popular method tells teachers not to correct studencs'
spelling or grammar. arguing char kids should be "independent spellet-s" so they
can be created as "individuals." (Imagine reading a nuespaper wyten useing that
filosofy.) 51 Teacher education courses emphasize that creating a positive atmosphere
is more important than correcting misrakes.52 In 2005, a Bcitish teacher
proposed eliminating the word "fail" from education; instead of hearing that
they have failed, students should hear that rhey have "deferred success. "53
In rhe United States, office stores have started carrying large stocks of purple
pens, as some teachers say that red ink is mo "scary" for children's papers.54
500 JEAN TWENGE
Flo1ida elementary schoolteacher Robin Slipakoff said, "Red has a negative connotation,
and we want to promote self-confidence."55
Grade iJ1flation has also reached record highs. In 2004, 48% of American
college freshmen-almost half-reported earning an A average in high school,
compared to only 18% in 1968, even though SAT scores decreased over this
time peiiod.5
" ·'Each year we think lthe number with an A averageJ can't inflate
anymore. And then it does again. The 'C' grade is almost a thing of the past,''
noted Andrew Astin, the lead researcher for the study. These higher grades were
given out even though students were doing less work.57 Only 33% of Americ::in
college fi.??shmen in 2003 reported studying six or more hours a week during
their last year 9f high school, compared to 47% in 1987.58 So why are they still
getting better grades? "Teachers want to raise the self-esteem and feel-good attitudes
of swdents." explains Howard Everson of the CoUege Board.59 We have
become a Lake Wobegon nation: all of our children are above average.
The results of these policies have played out in schools around the country.
Emily, 8, came home from school one day proud chat she got half of the words
right on her spelljng test (in other words, a grade of 50). When her mother
pointed out that this wasn't very good, Emily replied that her teacher had said
it was just fine. At her school near Dallas, Texas, I !-:year-old Kayla was invited
co the math class pizza party as a reward for making a good grade, even though
she had managed only a barely passing 71. The pizza parrjes used to be only for
children who made As, but in recent years the school has invited every child
who simply passed.
This basically means that we don't expect children co learn anything. As
long as they feel good, that seems co be all that's required. As education professor
Maureen Stout notes, many educational psychologists bebeve that schools should
be "places in which children are insulated from the outside world and
emotionally-not intellectually-nourished .... My colleagues always referred to
the importance of making kids feel good about themselves but rarely, if ever,
spoke of achievement, ideals, goals, character, or decency. "60 The future teachers
whom Stout was educating believed that "children shouldn't be challenged to
try things that others in the class are not ready for, since that would promote
competition, and competition is bad for self-esteem. Second, grading should be
avoided if at all possible, bur, if absolutely necessary, should be done in a way
that avoids any indication that Johnny is anything less than a stellar pupil."
Grade inflation and lack of competition may be backfiring: in 2003. 43% of
college freshmen reported that they were frequently bored in class during their
last year of high school, up from 29% in 1985.61 Thjs is not smprising: how
interesting could school possibly be when everyone gets an A and self-esteem is
more important than learning?
Perhaps as a result of all of this self-esteem building, educational psychologist
Harold Stevenson found that American children tanked ve1y hjghly when asked
how good they were at math.62 Of course, their act11al math perfonnance is
merely mediocre, with other counnies' youth routinely outranking An1erican
children. Every year, news anchors solemnly report how far AmericaJ1 kids are
AN ARMY OF ONE: ME 501
falJing behind. The emphasis on self:.e??tt:em can't be blamed entirely for chis, of
course, but one could easily argue that children's time nught be better spent
doing math than heating that they are special. ln 2004, 70% of Ametican college
freshmen reported that their ·'academic ability" was "abovt: average" or "highest
10%," an amusing demonstration of American youths' self-confidence outpacing
their ability at math.
What lcind of young people does this produce? Many teachet-s and social
observers say it results in kids who can't wke c1iticism. In other words, employers,
get ready for a group of easily hu1t young worke1-s. Peter Sacks, author of
Generation X Goes to Colle,ge, noted the extraordina1y thin-skinnedness of the
undergraduates he taught, and my expe1ience has been no ditferent. I've learned
nor to discuss test items chat the majority of students missed, as this invariably
Jeads ro lots of whiny defensiveness and very little actual leanrn1g. The two
trends are definitely related: research shows that when people with high selfesteem
are criticized. they became unfriendly. rude, and uncooperative, even
coward people who had nothing ro do with the criticism. 63
None of this should reaUy surp1ise us. Students "look :md act like what rhe
lself-esteemj theories say they should look and act like," notes Hewitt. "They
tend co act as though they believe they have wotthy and good inner essences,
regardless of what people say or how they behave, that they deserve: recognition
and attention from others, and their unique individual needs shouJd be considered
first and foremost. "
6
?? And, of course, this is exactly what has happened:
GenMe takes for granted that the self comes first, and we often believe exactly
what we were so carefulJy raught-char we're special.
But this must have an upside; surely kids who have high self-esteem go 011
to make better grades and achieve more in school. Actually, they don't. There is
a small correlation between self-esteem and grades.65 However, self-esteem does
not cause high grades-instead, high grades cause bjgher self-esteem. So sdfesreem
programs clearly put the ca1t before the horse in trying co increase selfesceem.
Even much of the small link from high grades to high self-esteem can be
explained by other factors such as income: rich kids, for example, have higher
self-esteem and get better grades, but chat's because coming from an affluent
home causes both of these things, and not because they cause each other. This
resembles the horse and the cart being towed on a flatbed truck-neither the cart
nor the horse is causing the motion in the ocher even though they are moving
together. As self-esteem programs aren't going to make all kids rich, they won't
raise self-esteem this w,iy, either.
Nor does high self-esteem protect against teen pregnancy, juvenile delinquency,
akoholism, drug abuse, or chronic welfare dependency. Several comprehensive
reviews of the research literature by different authors have aU concluded
rhar self-esteem doesn't cause much of anything.66 Even the book sponsored by
the California Task Force ro Promote Self-Esteem and Persona] and Social
Responsibility, which spent a qua1ter of a million dollars t1ying to raise Californians'
self-esteem. found that seff-esteem isn't linked to acaden,jc achievem.ent, good
behavior, or any other outcome the Task Force was formed to address.67
502 JEAN TWENGE
Are Self-Esteem Programs Good or Bad?
Psychologi??t Martin Seligman h:,h criticized self-esteem progr:11m as empty and
shortsighted. He .1rgues clue self-esteem based on noch111g does not ??erve children
welJ in rhe long run; ic·s better. he says, for children to develop re.11 skills and fed
good :ibout accompli hing something.6l-l Roy l3aumeister, the lead author of an
extemive review of the research on self-esteem. found chat self-esteem doe not
lead to becter grades. improved work pcrfom1ance. decreased violence. or less
cheating. In fact. people with high sdf-estec111 are often more violent and more
likely to cheat: "le is very questionable whether lthe few benefits) jmtify the
effort and expense that schools, parents, :ind therapms have put into raising
self-e??tcem," l3au111eistcr wrote. "After aJl these years, I'm sorry to say, my recommendation
is this: forget about self-esteem and conccntr,1tc more on selfcontrol
and self-discipline . .,<,CJ
I agree with both of these experts. SeJf-esteem is an outcome, not a cause. In
ocher words, it doesn't do much good to encourage a child to feel good about
hinm:lfjusr to feel good; this doesn't mean anything. Children develop tn1e selfesteem
from behaving welJ and accomplishing chin??. ·'What the sdf-esteem
movement really says to ??tudents is that their achit'vcmt:nt is not important and
their minds arc not worth developing,'· writes Maureen Stout. It's clearly better
for children to vaJue learning rather than ??imply feeling good.70
So should kids ft:el bad about themselves if thcy're not good at school or
sports? No. They should feel bad if they didn't work h,1rd and try. And even if
they don't succeed, sometimes negative feelings c.111 be a motivator. Trying
something challenging and learning from the experience is better than feeling
good about olll·sclf for no reason.
Also. everyone can do sowc1hi11,?? well. Kids who an:: not athletic or who
struggle with school might have another caknt, like music or art. Almost all children
can develop pride from being a good friend or helping someone. Kids can
do many thinb?? co feel good about themselves, so self-esteem can be based on
something. If ,1 child teels great abour himself even when he dot·s nothing. why
do anything? Self-esteem wjrhout basis encourages laziness rather than hard
work. On tht· other hand, we shouldn't go too far and hinge our self-wo1th
entirely on one external goal. like getting good grades. As psychologist Jennifer
Crocker documents, the ,ccsa\\' of sclf-estce111 this produce?? can lead to poor
physical and mental health.71 A happy medium is what's called for here: don't
feel bad about yourself because you made a bad grade-jmt don't feel good
about yourself if you didn't even m1dy. U\e your b.1d feelings as a moti,·ator to
do better next rime. True self-confidence COl11l'S from honing your talents and
leamill!( things, not from being told you'ni great jmt because you exist.
The practice of not correcting mistake??, ,,voiding letter grades. and di\Couraging
competition is also misguided. Competition can help make lcami11g fun; as
Stout poims out, look at how che disabled kitls in the- Speci:tl Olympics benefit
from competing. Many ,;chools now don't publish the honor roll of children
who do well in ??chool and generally downpl.1y gradl'S because. they falsely belil!ve.
competition isn't good for self-esteem (as s0111e kids won't make the honor roll,
and some kids will makl' Cs). But can you imagine not publishing the scores of a
AN ARMY OF ONE: ME 503
basketball game because it nught not be good for the losing team ·s self-esteem?
Can you imagine not keeping score in the game) What fun wollld that be? The
self-esteem movc.ment, Stout argues, is popular because it is sweetly addictive.: teachers
don't have to c1iticizc, kids don't have to be c1iticized, and eve,yone goes
home feeling happy. The problem is they also go home ignorant and uneducated.
Kids who don't excel in a certain area should stilJ be encouraged to keep
trying. This isn't self-esteem, however: it's self-control. Self-control. or the ability
to persevere and keep going, is a much better predictor of life outcomes than
self-esteem. Children high in self-control mah better grades and finish more
years of education, and they're less likely to use drugs or have a teenage pregnancy.
Self-control predicts all of those things n::searchers had hoped self-esteem
would, but hasn't.
Cross-cultural m1dies provide a good example of the benefits of self-control
over self-esteem. Asians, for example, have lower selt:.esteem than Arnericans.72
llut when Asian Students find out that they scored low on a particular task, they
want to keep working on chat task so rhey can improve their perfom1ance.
American students. in contrast, prefer to give up on that task and work on
another one.73 In other words, Americans preserve their self-esteem at the
expense of doing becter at a difficult task. This goes a long way toward exphtining
why Asian children perfo1111 better at math and at school in general.
Young people who have lugh self-esteem. built on shaky foundations might
run into trouble when chey encounter the harsh realities of the real world. A??
Scout argues, kids who are given meaningless A?? and promoted when tbey haven't
learned the material wiJJ lacer find out in college or the working world that they
don't know much at all. And what will thm do co their self-esteem, or, more important,
their careers? Unlike your teacher, your boss .isn ·c going to care much about
preserving your high self-esteem. The self-esteem emphasis le;ives kids ilJ prepared
for the inevitable criticism and occasional failure that is real life. "There is 110 selfesteem
movement in the work world," points out one father. "If you present a bad
report at the office, your boss isn't going to say. ·Hey. I like che color paper you
chose.' Setting kids up Like this is doing them a tremendous disservice."7
"
1
In any educational program, one has ro consider the trade-off be.tween benefit
and risk. Valuing self-esteem over learning and accompfohment is clearly
ham1ful, as children feel gre:1c about themselves but are cheated out of the education
they need to succeed. Self-esteem program?? 111(1,!,hl benefit the smalJ mino1ity
of kids who really do feel worth.less. but those kjds are likely 'to have bigger problems
that self-esteem boosting won ·c fi.,-,.c The risk in these progra111s is in inflating
the self:.concept of children who already think the world revolves around them.
Building up the self-esteem and importance of kids who are already egocenttic
can bring trouble, :.is it c.111 lead to narcissism-and maybe it alrc:ady has.
Changes in Narcissism
Narcissism is one of che few personality traits rhat psychologists agree is almost
completely negative. Narcissists :ire overly focused 011 themselves and l:ick empathy
for others, which meam they cannot see another person's perspective.75
(Sound like the last clerk who served you') They also feel entitled co special
504 JEAN TWENGE
privileges and believe that they are superior to other people. As a result, narcissists
,tre bad relationship partners and can be difficult to work with. Narcissists are
also more likely to be hostile, feel anxious, compromise their health, and fight
with fiiends and family. Unlike those merely high in self-esteem, narcissists admit
that they don't feel close to ocher people.7c'
All evidence suggests that narcissism is much more common in recent generations.
In tl1.e ear:ly 1950s, only l 2% of teens aged 14 to J 6 agreed with the statement
"Tam an important person.''77 By the late 1980s, an incredible 80%--almost
seven times as• many--daimcd they were important. Psychologist Harrison
Gough found consistent increases on narcissism items among college students
quizzed between the 1960s and the 1990s.78 GenMe students were more likely
to agree that "[ would be willing to describe myself as a pretty 'strong' personality"
and "I have often met people who were supposed to be experts who were no
better than I." In other words, those other people don't know what they're talking
about, so everyone should listen to me.
In a 2002 survey of 3,445 people conducted by Joshua Foster, Keith
Campbell, and me, younger people scored considerably higher on the Narcissistic
Personality Inventory, agreeing with items such as "lf I mled the world it would
be a better place," "I am a special person," and "l can live my Life any way l
want tO. "79 (These statements evoke the image of a young man speeding down
the highway in the world's biggest SUV, honking his horn, and screaming, "Get
out of my way! I'm important!") This study was cross-sectional, though, meaning
chat it was a one-time sample of people of different ages. For that reason, we
cannot be sure if any differences are due to age or to generation; however, the
other studies of narcissism mentioned previously suggest that generation plays a
role. It is also interesting that narcissism scores were fairly high until around age
35, after which they decreased markedly. This is right around the cutoff
between GenMe and previous generations.
Narcissism is the darker side of the focus on the self, and is often confused
with self-esteem. Self-esteem is often based on solid relationships with others,
whereas narcissism comes from believing chat you are special and more important
than other people. Many of the school programs designed to raise self-esteem
probably raise narcissism instead. Lillian Katz, a professor of early childhood education
at the University of Illinois, wrote an article titled "All About Me: Are
We Developing Our Children's Self-Esteem or Their Narcissism?" She writes,
"Many of the practices advocated in pursuit of [high self-esteem] may instead
inadvertently develop narcissism in the fonn of excessive preoccupation with
onese If.. ,,so B ecause t I1 e sc I 100I programs e1np 11 as1. ze be m. g " spec1. a l" rat1I er t h an
encouraging friendships, we may be training an army of little narcissists instead
of raising kids' self-esteem.
Many young people also display entitlement, a fucec of narcissism chat
involves believing that you deserve and are entitled to more than others.
A scale that measures entitlement has items like "Things should go my way,"
"I demand the best because I'm worth it," and (my favo1ite) "[f I were on the
Titanic, I would deserve to be on t/ie .fi,-s/ lifeboat!"81 A 2005 Associated Press
article printed in hundred?? of news outlets labeled today's young people "The
AN ARMY OF ONE: ME 505
Entitlement Generation." In the article, employe.rs complained that young
employees expected too much coo soon and had ve,y high expectations for saJ-
. R2 ary and promobons.
Teachers h::ive seen this attitude for years now. One of my colleagues said his
students acted as if grades were something they simply deserved co get no matter
what. He joked that their attitude could be summed up by "Where's my A? I distinctly
remember ordering :m A from the catalog." Stout, the education professor.
lists the student statements fumili:ir to teachers everywhere: "l need a better grade,"
"I deserve an A on this paper," "l 11e1 1er get Bs." Stout points out that the self-esteem
movement places the student's feelings at the center, so "students learn that they do
not need to respect their teachers or even earn their grades, so they begin to believe
that they are entitled to grades, respect, or anything else ... just for asking!"R3
Unfo1tunately, narcissism can lead to outcomes fur worse than grade grnbbing.
Several studies have found chat narcissists lash out aggressively when they are
insulted or rejected.84 Eric Hanis and Dylan KJebold, the teenage gu11men ac
CoJurnbine High School, made statements remarkably similar to items on the
most popular narcissism questionnaire. On a videotape made before the shootings,
Harris picked up a gun, made a shooting noise, and said, "Isn't it fun to get the
respect we're going co deserve?"85 (Chillingly sirniJar to the narcissism item "I insist
upon getting the respect that is due me.") Later, Hanis said, "I could convince
them that rm going to climb Mount Everest, or I have a twin brother growing
out of my back. I can make you believe anything" (virtually identical to the item
.. ! can make anyone believe anythi11g I want them to"). Harris and Klebold then
debate which famous movie director wiJJ film their story. A few weeks after making
the videotapes, Hanis and KJebold killed thirteen people and then themselves.
Other examples abound. ln a set of lab studies, narcissistic men felr less
empathy for rape victims, reported more enjoyment when watching a rape
??cene in a movie. and were more punitive toward a woman who refused to
read a sexually arousing passage out loud to them.86 Abusive husbands who
threaten to kill their wives---und tragically sometimes do-are the ultimate narcissists.
They see everyone and everything in tern,s of ful6J.ling their needs, and
become very angry a.nd aggressive when things don't go exactly their way. Many
workplace shootings occur after an employee is fired and decides he'll "show'·
everyone how powerful he is.
The 1ise in narcissism has ve1y deep roots. It's not just that we foe] better
about ourselves, but that we even think to ask the question. We fixate on selfesteem,
and unthinkingly build narcissism, because we believe that the needs of
the individual are paramount. This will stay with us even if self-esteem programs
end up in the dustbin of history.
NOTES
I. L,dies· Homt: Journal to/ti rc·atfers: Warren, R.ick. "Learn to Love Yourself!" Ladies'
Ho1111' )0111·1,al. March 2005; p. 36.
2. /Wf/iile P:irenting ofmd: Lamb, Yanick R.ice. "Proud to Be Me!" Pnrl'lltin,\/, April
2()()5.